# Limitations and Future Perspectives

This proposal features an open-source framework, where the current set of agents and templates support advanced features for real-time content monitoring and data delivery. We expect that further detection formats and delivery methods will be included in the near future, by both the development team and the expected user community. This will make the framework more suitable for more scenarios within or beyond the life sciences’ scope. 
One of the current limitations concerns data validation and rule processing. We plan to expand the framework’s data warehousing features by focusing on rule processing. The goal is to detach the ETL transform task from the delivery task, enabling more complex data transformation that obey custom heuristics. In a simple use case, we want to perform the delivery only for data above a given threshold. Although we can perform this validation using Ruby code variables, simplifying this process with a dedicated section will improve the framework’s usability.
In the long haul, we can further enhance rule processing with the inclusion of semantics. Latest developments on semantic web technologies and frameworks are responsible for an increased adoption within the life sciences field. As such, we plan to include support for SPARQL agents and delivery templates, and new inference and reasoning engines, allowing researchers to perform more complex operations with their data. 
Another framework limitation is associated with the mandatory configuration of scheduling properties for agents. Assuming a constant flow of information in and out of the framework, we plan to include algorithms for the automatic identification of the best schedules for each resource. For instance, if a monitored resource generates events on a daily basis, the system should automatically understand that it is not efficient to schedule the resource for monitoring every 5 minutes. This will enhance the handling or large volumes of data and further improve the framework’s performance.