# How to Write a Competitive Proposal for Horizon 2020

## Module 1

- 7 year program
- Each program has several subprograms
- Draft programs already available for 2015

### Content
- the scientific idea
*Selling the science*: educating, convincing, persuading the evaluators
*selecting best partners*
*high impact score*

### Rules

No focus on rules

### From programmes to projects

- understand the “brussels english”
- how to go from call challenges to proposal impact
- europa.eu

###  Innovation on SMEs

- only  SMEs
- SBIR model

### Excellent Science: 
- Bottom up program
- free to submit anything you want
- for PhDs
- Marie Curie funds people

### FET

- crazy ideas FET Open
- FET proactive lots of topics

### Poor Explanation and Low Impact

Science - Valley of Death - Economy and Society

Technology Readiness Level
- 1 to 9
- 1 basic
- 4 working on laboratory
- 5 testing in real environment
- 6 production in real environment
- 9 it’s on the market

not every proposal is adequate to your work (Science != IPO)

## Module 2

### Lobby

KET, COST

### Evaluation
Check evaluators’ template


## Module 3

### Evaluation

- 100 proposals
— Eligibility
- 10 eliminated by commission
- 50 eliminated by threshold

 - abstract is one page proposal
B1 is the more important part, move everything and key brilliant sentences to the beginning of the proposal
B2, impact, second most important
13% must go to SMEs

### Pillar II and III proposals

- write from commission up (commission - scientific evaluators - bureaucrats)

### ERC

- propose 5 equally important questions

## Module 4

### How to write the “impact” of the project

- who will be excited by the final results of this proposal?
- innovation chain
- don’t go straight into the detail (check TRL definition)

problem: research partner TRL too distant from company TRL

the impact should be written by the partner who wants the results of the project

## Module 5

One page proposal

- use to decide on which projects get funded
- be very precise
- why? 5 key questions

### 5 key questions

**Facts and Figures**

- educate the evaluator with facts and figures
- TELES (technical economic legislation environment social)?

1. why bother? who cares? what problem are you trying to solve?
2. is it a european priority? could it be solved at national level?
3. is the solution already available (product, service, transfer)?
4. why now? what happens if we don’t do this now?
5. why you? are you the best people to do this work?

### ERC and B1

1. why bother?
2. will this establish europe and leader?
3. is the knowledge available (state of the art)?
4. why now? why not before?
5. why you?

### strategy

Presentation (15 min)
Presentation (8 slides)
One page proposal
Proposal abstract

## Module 6

Streamlining the writing of proposals

- effort is not evenly distributed
- one page -> 4 page

1. select topic: one page proposal, confirm partners, meet NCP
2. consortium meeting: distribution of work, partners writing, input to writer
3. draft four page proposal:
4. all inputs to writer: prepare full draft
5. core group meeting: read out loud from cover to cover
6. full proposal: edit, proof read, review, refine, polish

- proposal has to be finished (at least) 4 weeks in advance

- consortium meeting to define project startup

## Module 7

EU Research Support Services
 
- available

## Key point from the workshop

- get out of your chair if you want to have success
- consulting companies? do everything but B1, proposal manager
- promote myself as partner? 





