
# ResearchImpact

Although this review had the main goal of covering the scientific results, we cannot ignore additional fundamental questions surrounding large-scale projects. 
Hence, we must discuss the privacy policies applied to research-oriented datasets, the creation of businesses sustained by public funding or the lack of publicly visible project evaluation outcomes.
The general community perceives that there is a huge amount of public funds being poured into research projects in all areas. Still, the outcomes of these projects are not as public as desired. There’s an underlying sense of fulfilment in investing on research, especially in fields related with life sciences, such as rare diseases treatments, pharmaceutical research or any other relevant \*omics field: IMI, EC and NIH are funding science.
Figure 1.2 highlights that only a quarter of studied projects expect to provide their data publicly to the general research audience. Data access restrictions are too common on research. Large investments, with public funds, are being applied to clinical drug trials, patient registries development and next-generation sequencing technologies. Yet, the majority of research outcomes will not be made available to the public. And, despite pharmaceutical companies financial involvement in IMI projects, the expected profit outcome from these projects will definitely surpass invested money. Patient-level data, obtained with public research funds, which have the potential of being fundamental to create new knowledge, are not available to the research community as they are closed behind complex privacy policies and never-ending access restrictions.
Likewise, Figure 2 charts show that there are several projects whose future sustainability will rely on implementing a profit-oriented business model. Hence, we must ask, again, how can public funds, applied to research projects, be used to create self-sustainable companies. These companies will sell products, software or data, that was created with research funds stemming from public investment.
At last, there is a great difficulty in finding projects details and their respective evaluation results. It is as if the IMI, EC and NIH projects lists are difficult to access and lack essential project details on purpose. The general audience cannot find out how projects are evaluated, their assessment results and, more importantly, their visible outcomes. Despite having concluded that most project results are private, the projects’ evaluation should be public. Furthermore, it should be supported by a clear long-term plan that assessed the proper use of public funds to actually advance research. Finished projects should be evaluated in multiple timespans, not just when the deadline is reached. Evaluating projects 2, 5 or 10 years after their finish date would improve the understanding of how successful was the large sums of invested money.
The reality is that IMI, EC and NIH are funding projects that have the liberty to create for-profit businesses and, more importantly, the liberty to apply public funds to the most diverse research tasks, whether they are directly related to the expected project results.
