# Background

- automated real time data integration
	- live data updates
	- automated process
	- heterogeneous many to many interoperability
- framework enabling multiple architectures
	- publish/subscribe, integration-as-a-service, RESThooks
	- for both users and researchers)


he scale of information available for life sciences research is growing rapidly [refs]. To cope with this data deluge, biomedical technologies’ accelerated evolution is increasingly demanding hardware and software advances. More important than direct access to data is the services layer, i.e., the features provided to end-users on top of collected data. This reinforces the role of service-oriented architectures in modern bioinformatics environments [refs].
Biomedical data are complex: heterogeneously structured, originating from several different sources, represented through various standards, provided via distinct formats and with meaning changing over time [ref Darmon et al 2005, architecture framework for complex data wrehouses]. From next generation sequencing hardware [ref Cloudgene - 1] to the the growing availability of biomedical sensors, tapping this ongoing data stream is a cumbersome task [ref data integration bioinformatics]. Integrating data and making it accessible to others, i.e., interoperable, is an essential activity, common to scientific research projects [ref the value of data, ].
In most research environments, researchers perform these tasks on a daily basis. Whether through the manual collection and curation of data or the use of software, accessing and integrating data is essential to success in life sciences’ research work.
In recent years, data integration and interoperability in the life sciences is focused on three interdependent domains. Cloud-based strategies [ref in silica research in the era of cloud computing, cloud gene], service-oriented architectures [refs towards interoperable bioscience data, Galaxy ] and semantic web technologies [refs coeus, diseasecard, SADI].
Despite these developments, the scope and usability of the majority of tools available to researchers is limited. Thus, limiting the research quality.
In this work we introduce i2x, an open-source framework to streamline data integration and interoperability tasks. i2x’s goals are two-fold: enabling the automated real-time integration of data and empowering the creation of state-of-the-art integration applications.
Traditional integration approaches used by warehouses rely on batch, off-line ETL processes. These are manually triggered on regular intervals of downtime, which can range from weeks to months to years. In the life sciences domain, the demand for fresh data cannot be ignored. Hence, we need to deploy new strategies that are dynamic [ref active xml-based web data integration], reactive [ref reducing ETL times…] and event-driven [ref event-driven data integration…, an event-based near real-time..]. Thus, today’s platforms must react intelligently, i.e., in real-time and autonomously, to changes detected in integration environments.
With i2x, we deploy distributed agents to track data changes and push them to integration services. i2x uses internal data storage for content change detection, generating events, which will in turn trigger user-specified actions. Agents monitor resources in CSV, JSON, XML or SQL format. This covers the majority of data sources and services available. Delivery templates handle user actions, interacting with files, emails or URLs. As a result, there are endless combinations for customisable integration tasks, connecting agents with templates. Among others, i2x’s architecture major outcomes are live data integration and heterogeneous many-to-many interoperability. Furthermore, these are attained without compromising the resources’ security, as i2x is non-obtrusive.
Besides the researcher-oriented approach, i2x also targets bioinformatics developers. i2x’s underlying strategy covers various features for publish/subscribe, cloud-based or Integration-as-a-Service architectures. This makes i2x ideal for launching applications focusing on niche research fields or offering a smaller, yet essential, subset of features. As discussed further in the article, implementing scenarios for human variome integration, publication tracking or dynamic DICOM-based notifications is straightforward.
Life sciences research relies heavily on the integration of biomedical data. With i2x, we bring forward an innovative approach to quickly deploy intelligent, automated, real-time integration tasks. Moreover, we bring these features to researchers, returning them their active control over their research workflow.