# A semantic web architecture for connecting rare disease registries

Rare disease registries are now an essential tool for all clinical stakeholders.  These systems’ features aim to improve patient treatments, a vital step towards personalized medicine. Yet, the growing number of disease-specific patient registries brings new challenges for life sciences researchers, especially at two interrelated levels: data sharing and data access. These systems are closed data silos, with independent formats and data models. As they were built with security and privacy in mind, available tools lack sharing mechanisms, thus making data access a complex process. Despite these key requirements’ relevance, accessing and sharing anonymized data is essential create knowledge, enabling a better understanding of studied diseases.
As such, we introduce a semantic web-based architecture to connect distributed and heterogeneous  registries. The semantic web paradigm enhances the ways we deal with data, optimising how we can create, infer and publish knowledge. We use COEUS, a semantic web application framework, to deploy multiple registry addons, each extracting anonymized data from the associated registry. These data are translated and mapped to an ontology common to all rare diseases registries. This results in a unique semantic layer, covering the various patient registries, which we access using federated querying. Ultimately, this strategy empowers a transparent view through connected registries, enabling state-of-the-art semantic data sharing and access.