
# conclusion

Data and services integration is fundamental for researchers’ continuous pursuit of new knowledge. The latest software and hardware advances optimize information scaffolding, resulting in the faster generation of vast amounts of data. Until recently, the major challenge for integration algorithms was related to the acquisition, transformation and standardisation of heterogeneous data. Nowadays, the major bottleneck for scientific advance regards the demand for updated datasets, where researchers can have a realistic vision of all integrated data at any given moment. Connecting distributed data sources is no longer a problem thanks to the widespread availability of integration tools. Nonetheless, ensuring that the original data sources are synchronised with our integration endpoint is still an ongoing challenge for real-time integration.
In this work we introduce i2x, a framework targeted at both researchers and developers, that enables anyone to deploy automated integration tasks for extracting, transforming and loading data in real-time. i2x is based on events that match changes in content such as new or updated datasets. Events are actively identified through the deployment of intelligent agents, which monitor data sources on a specified schedule, or passively, via the reception of push-based data with the event metadata. In addition, i2x enables delivering data to miscellaneous endpoints, from web services to file systems, which further improves the framework’s flexibility. i2x is available online at https://bioinformatics.ua.pt/i2x/.