# Integration-as-a-Service for Bioinformatics

## abstract

Last decade’s software and hardware advances made data integration an essential skill for bioinformatics researchers and developers. The ability to import, transform and export data from multiple resources is a common feature for miscellaneous tools. These range from complex application suites to simple standalone command-line tools. Despite the quality behind available tools, data and services’ evolution keeps pushing integration demands forward. Nowadays, integration requirements are associated with cloud-based technologies. Hence, in this work we introduce a cloud-based framework to streamline Integration-as-a-Service for bioinformatics. Our goal is to facilitate the creation of next-generation bioinformatics applications that rely heavily on automated, real-time, integration and interoperability tasks. This work bridges the gap between the growing number of data services and the growing needs of users who recurrently perform integration tasks. This platform simplifies accessing, transforming and loading data from and to heterogeneous services. Moreover, it uses an atomic data storage engine to improve content change detection, enabling an intelligent integration workflow where only fresh data are processed, i.e., delivered to any number of configurable endpoints.

## conclusion

Nowadays, access to vast amounts of life sciences data is a vulgar commodity. Hence, modern integration strategies have arisen to better explore available information. In spite of their quality, existing models lack built-in mechanisms for handling change and time. That is, connecting data and ser-vices is a manual task, whose only results are time-limited snapshots.
With this research work we introduce a framework for enhanced integration and interoperability. This system’s innovative features - automation, real-time processing, flexi-bility and extensibility - convey true added value to biomed-ical data integration and interoperability.
Automation brings a new approach to the field, stimulat-ing reactive and event-driven integration tasks. Further-more, live data integration brought by automated and real-time intelligent agents ensure data up-to-dateness. The pro-posed framework is non-obtrusive, requires no changes in original data sources, and can process data to and from het-erogeneous data sources, making it an extremely flexible and adaptable framework.
This system is relevant for both researchers and develop-ers, blurring the line between them. On the one hand, its streamlined configuration process puts a powerful integra-tion & interoperability framework at the hands of less tech-savvy users. This enables anyone to create business-level data and service integration tasks with reduced effort. On the other hand, developers can download and use the framework open-source code. As the framework supports dynamic real-time message translation, formatting and de-livery to multiple resources, it can play a central role in ser-vice-oriented architectures, from publish/subscribe to event-driven up to cloud-based integration-as-a-service environ-ments.
This research work delivers a system that bridges the gap between data and services through a new intelligent integra-tion and interoperability layer, further enabling the creation of next generation bioinformatics applications
