# Integration-as-a-Service for Bioinformatics

## abstract

Last decade’s software and hardware advances made data integration an essential skill for bioinformatics researchers and developers. The ability to import, transform and export data from multiple resources is a common feature for miscellaneous tools. These range from complex application suites to simple standalone command-line tools. Despite the quality behind available tools, data and services’ evolution keeps pushing integration demands forward. Nowadays, integration requirements are associated with cloud-based technologies. Hence, in this work we introduce a cloud-based framework to streamline Integration-as-a-Service for bioinformatics. Our goal is to facilitate the creation of next-generation bioinformatics applications that rely heavily on automated, real-time, integration and interoperability tasks. This work bridges the gap between the growing number of data services and the growing needs of users who recurrently perform integration tasks. This platform simplifies accessing, transforming and loading data from and to heterogeneous services. Moreover, it uses an atomic data storage engine to improve content change detection, enabling an intelligent integration workflow where only fresh data are processed, i.e., delivered to any number of configurable endpoints.

## conclusion

The amount of available data and services is growing in any domain. This is especially true in the life sciences area. Modern research relies on advanced software to better explore available information. Furthermore, developers and researchers need toolkits that ease data exchanges between many disparate sources. Hence, bioinformatics data integration and interoperability software is now a vulgar commodity.
Despite the quality of existing tools, most lack built-in mechanisms to handle constant data evolution, time-based constraints or cloud-based software. This means that available strategies rely on error-prone processes, where developers must manually extract, assess, transform and export data between distinct systems.
In this research work we introduce a framework to bring Integration-as-a-Service to the bioinformatics field. This platform enables the creation of data integration and interoperability applications for bioinformatics through a streamlined ETL workflow. Its innovation brings value in three key areas: automation, real-time processing and online support. 
Automation brings a new approach to the field, stimulating reactive and event-driven integration tasks. The real-time execution of integration tasks further complements our automated approach, resulting in intelligent live data integration. At last, deploying this system in a cloud-based environment puts a comprehensive technological integration and interoperability stack at the users’ fingertips.
In summary, this research work delivers a system that bridges the gap between data and services through a new intelligent integration and interoperability layer, further enabling the creation of next generation bioinformatics applications.