# Exploring nanopublishing with the COEUS framework

## Abstract

A nanopublication represents the smallest unit of publishable information, enhancing attribution and ownership of specific data elements. With this standard format for relating atomic data with its authors, accessing and exchanging knowledge becomes a more streamlined process.
The COEUS semantic web application framework delivers, in a single package, all the tools required to rapidly build a new semantic knowledge base from scratch, including multiple data integration algorithms and interoperability services.
This work introduces the combination of COEUS integration and interoperability features with the nanopublication standard. This results in an unique nanopublishing pipeline, where collections of annotated data can be modelled and integrated, stored in a semantic knowledge base, and published through COEUS API.

## Introduction

The Semantic Web [21] paradigm introduces multiple technologies and strategies that are a perfect fit to represent real-world relationships in digital information systems. Semantic Web standards tackle challenges in the most diverse domains, from data heterogeneity to service interoperability (or lack thereof) [22, 23]. The cornerstone of this flexibility is the concept of nanpublications, a simple micro attribution strategy enabling the creation of machine-readable knowledge assertions, empowering a new structure level for the huge amounts of information flooding the scientific field [24, 25]. 
With this standard still its infancy, new tools are required to streamline the nanopublications generation and publishing process. Nowadays, this process is still manual, based on ad-hoc tools tailored to nice use cases.
This work introduces a strategy that exploits COEUS' [refs] features to streamline the creation, storage and publishing of nanopublications. This new pipeline starts with a translation process, integrating data from existing datasets into a semantic knowledge base, and modelling it according to the nanopublications standard. Aggregated knowledge is made available through COEUS' API, including REST services, a SPARQL endpoint, LinkedData interfaces and a nanopublications URI interface.

## Background

Migrating systems to a Semantic Web environment is no different than the transition to previous paradigms. New technologies, algorithms and development strategies are introduced, making this transition a cumbersome task. As such, the COEUS framework was built to overcome these challenges. The COEUS platform improves four key features in the development of new Semantic Web applications: (1) the transition from primitive to semantically enhanced systems; (2) the integration and triplification of data; (3) the sharing of knowledge through interoperable interfaces; (4) the deployment of a knowledge federation layer.
COEUS' flexible integration engine improves traditional data warehousing Extract-Transform-Load tasks, enabling the acquisition of data from heterogeneous resources (in CSV, JSON, XML, SQL, SPARQL, RDF and LinkedData) and its translation to a semantic data abstraction. The latter organises knowledge in a cohesive structure, based on Entity-Concept-Item relationships. COEUS' API comprises various methods to access data (REST services, SPARQL endpoint, LinkedData interface, Java methods), making it easily available for querying and integration in external systems. 
Nanopublications expand existing Semantic Web strategies to standardise how one can attribute provenance, authorship, publication information and further relationships, always with the intention to stimulate information reuse. In a sense, nanopublications are a natural response to the exploding number and complexity behind scientific data. With this standard, we can summariesse published knowledge to a set of thoroughly individualised list of assertions - the nanopublication.
In summary, nanopublications are composed of three sections, each detailing assertion information, authorship and provenance, for elaborate knowledge statements [26] - Figure 1.

## Methods

The rational behind this work is to extend the base COEUS framework with support for nanopublications. This will enable a new nanopublishing pipeline where all tasks are automated. This process includes three general steps: (1) configuring the data abstraction to a semantic model - Figure 2-1; (2) integrating & translating data from external resources into the internal knowledge base - Figure 2-2; (3) sharing the nanopublications dataset - Figure 2-3. Adding nanopublishing support to COEUS leverages on its flexibility. Hence, new configuration properties were added to COEUS' ontology and a new data sharing interface, through nanopublications URIs, was added.

Before integrating any information, we need to define where it comes from, what data we need and how it will be abstracted to the nanopublications standard.


To integrate data we need, first of all, to know where it comes from in order to filter and to combine it into a single dataset. In this pharmacovigilance scenario, this task is performed outside our workflow. By using EU-ADR’s algorithms, we obtain a summarized statistical dataset, mapping miscellaneous metadata to the aforementioned signals, the interactions amongst drugs and adverse drug events. This harmonized dataset provides various data mining statistical values for each signal. These values account for the number of detected events, significance values for the interactions, exposure numbers and relative risk measures, among many others.
Moving on, we need to configure the setup for creating a new COEUS instance. As stated, the dataset source format is not a barrier because it can be imported from any widely used format. Furthermore, it is in the ontology setup that we define different connections endpoints (for instance, database connection strings or file URIs) and the actual integration proprieties (such as CSV column numbers or XML XPath queries). Further configuration information can be browsed in COEUS’ documentation. 

Once we understand the data we will import, we need to structure it. The COEUS framework has an organization model of data relationships that must be followed to take advantage of its capabilities. Hence, we started to construct the Seed (single framework instance) that includes the NanoPub, the Entity of the problem. From here we build the different Concepts associated with the Nanopublications schema and the ADR dataset: Nanopublications, Provenance, PublicationInfo, Assertion, ATC and Event. To complement this setup step, we also needed to create domain-specific object and data properties. Considering that each nanopublication assertion will detail the unique interaction amongst a drug and one adverse event, we added object properties to establish these relationships (nanoadr:hasATC and nanoadr:hasEvent) and several others for the summarized statistical data (for instance, nanoadr:hasExposure or nanoadr:hasPValue).
Next, it is based on this setup that COEUS automatically integrates the supplied data through dynamic processes. These advanced integration and triplification tasks follow several automated ETL (Extract, Transform and Load) mechanisms in order to generate a valid semantic web abstraction. With this mechanism, COEUS builds a semantic knowledge base from the configured pharmacovigilance data sources. 
Once this knowledge base is built, collected knowledge is made available for querying through multiple APIs, enabling advanced interoperability features that include REST, a SPARQL endpoint and LinkedData publication to explore the information in the knowledge base. Nanopublications data exchange – requests and downloads – are also made available, fulfilling the initial propositions.



This enables three main knowledge access endpoints: the SPARQL endpoint, the nanopublications service and the LinkedData interface.
The SPARQL query language allows the creation of complex semantic queries, which lead to improved knowledge access. The nanopublications service delivers all generated nanopublications through their unique identifier. A sample nanopublications output, according to the current standard, is included next. Likewise, authorship information is listed in the provenance section. At last, assorted publication information such as data rights and publisher data are included in the publication info statements.

LinkedData interfaces provide a new set of methods for accessing and linking data. With this standard, data are made available for browsing through dedicated web interfaces and RDF navigators easing the user interaction. Moreover, data are also available for integration in external entities, through direct RDF access. 

## Conclusion

Nanopublications arise as a new strategy to cope with knowledge provenance, ownership and sharing issues. The standard enables publishing comprehensive datasets, featuring publications, statistics or mutations, as a collection of rich individual assertions.
This work introduces an innovative nanopublishing pipeline, streamlining the translation of data in primitive formats to a semantic environment and, consequently, its delivery through open web interfaces.
